Add OAuth2 Proxy post (#1208)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-07-14-add-auth-to-any-app-with-oauth2-proxy.adoc

---
layout: blog_post

> title: "Add Auth to any app with OAuth2 Proxy"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Add Auth to Any App with OAuth2 Proxy"
```
it's that dang title case!

https://oauth2-proxy.github.io/oauth2-proxy/[OAuth2 Proxy] is a reverse proxy that sits in front of your application and handles the complexities of OpenID Connect / OAuth 2.0 for you; requests that make it to your application have already been authorized!

image::{% asset_path 'blog/add-auth-to-any-app-with-oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy-diagram.jpg' %}[alt=OAuth2 Proxy basic usage diagram,align=center]

**Prerequisites**

* https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/[Docker] and https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker Compose]
* https://httpie.io/cli[Httpie] (A user friendly HTTP client)
* https://cli.okta.com/[Okta CLI] (Configures applications in Okta)
* https://sdkman.io/[Java 17] (optional)

toc::[]

== An application without security

First things first, we need an application. You can use any web application, but for this post, I'll stick with a Java Spring Boot app that will echo the details of the inbound HTTP request. Echoing the request information will help visualize the additional HTTP headers added by OAuth2 Proxy, such as the user's email address.

> You can grab the project from https://github.com/TBD[GitHub]

Author: ```suggestion
You can grab the project from https://github.com/oktadev/okta-oauth2-proxy-example[GitHub]
```
```suggestion
You can grab the project from https://github.com/TBD[GitHub]
```

> You can grab the project from https://github.com/oktadev/okta-oauth2-proxy-example[GitHub]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can grab the project from https://github.com/oktadev/okta-oauth2-proxy-example[GitHub]:
```
```suggestion
You can grab the project from https://github.com/oktadev/okta-oauth2-proxy-example[GitHub]
```

[source,bash]
----

> git clone https://github.com/bdemers/okta-oauth2-proxy-example.git -b start

Author: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/oktadev/okta-oauth2-proxy-example.git -b start
```

cd okta-oauth2-proxy-example
----

IMPORTANT: If you want to see the completed project, check out the `main` branch instead.

> If you are interested in the details for this Java application, take a look at the `EchoApplication` class, it contains a single endpoint that will handle all requests and "dump" the contents of the request as a JSON object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in the details for this Java application, take a look at the `EchoApplication` class. It contains a single endpoint that will handle all requests and "dump" the contents of the request as a JSON object:
```
2 sentences

If you don't already have one, you'll need a free Okta developer account. Install the https://cli.okta.com/[Okta CLI]
and from the project directory, run `okta start` to sign up for a new account and configure this application!

NOTE: If you already have an Okta account, run `okta login` first.

.What does the Okta CLI do?
[%collapsible]
====

The Okta CLI will create an OIDC Web App in your Okta Org. It will add the required redirect URIs and grant access to the Everyone group. You will see output like the following when it's finished:

[source,shell]
----
Okta application configuration has been written to: .env
----

Run `cat .env` (or `type .env` on Windows) to see the issuer and credentials for your app.

[source,properties]
----
ISSUER=https://dev-133337.okta.com/oauth2/default
CLIENT_ID=0oab8eb55Kb9jdMIr5d6
CLIENT_SECRET=NEVER-SHOW-SECRETS
----
====

== Set up OAuth2 Proxy

There are two ways to use OAuth2 Proxy: route your traffic through it directly or use it with the Nginx `auth_request` directive. I'd recommend routing traffic through Nginx if possible, but I'll walk through both options and explain my recommendation below.

> To reduce the number of moving parts, I'll leave Nginx out to start with; all of our web traffic will flow through OAuth2 Proxy. Users who access the echo web application will be redirected to Okta to sign in. Once they have signed in, OAuth2 Proxy will set a session cookie. OAuth2 Proxy will validate the session before passing the request to the echo web app in future requests.

Author: ```suggestion
To reduce the number of moving parts, I'll leave Nginx out in this first example; all of our web traffic will flow through OAuth2 Proxy. Users who access the echo web application will be redirected to Okta to sign in. Once they have signed in, OAuth2 Proxy will set a session cookie. OAuth2 Proxy will validate the session before passing the request to the echo web app in future requests.

NOTE: In OAuth terms, OAuth2 Proxy is acting as the "client", handling the OAuth protocol details, (in this case, an https://oauth.net/2/grant-types/authorization-code/[Authorization Code Grant]). +
TL;DR - Redirects the user to the OAuth IdP's sign-in page and handles a "callback" route to return them to the application.
```

> To reduce the number of moving parts, I'll leave Nginx out to start with; all of our web traffic will flow through OAuth2 Proxy. Users who access the echo web application will be redirected to Okta to sign in. Once they have signed in, OAuth2 Proxy will set a session cookie. OAuth2 Proxy will validate the session before passing the request to the echo web app in future requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce the number of moving parts, I'll leave Nginx out in this first example; all of our web traffic will flow through OAuth2 Proxy. Users who access the echo web application will be redirected to Okta to sign in. Once they have signed in, OAuth2 Proxy will set a session cookie. OAuth2 Proxy will validate the session before passing the request to the echo web app in future requests.
```
more context

      OAUTH2_PROXY_OIDC_ISSUER_URL: ${ISSUER}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${CLIENT_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_ACCESS_TOKEN: true # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_EMAIL_DOMAINS: '*' # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_REDIRECT_URL: http://localhost:4180/oauth2/callback # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET} # <.>

    ports:
      - 4180:4180 # <.>
----

<.> Build and run Dockerfile in the current directory.
<.> Listen on port `4180`.
<.> Proxy authenticated requests to the Java web-app container.
<.> OIDC client information (issuer, client ID, and client secret), these values are defined in the `.env` file.
<.> Optionally, pass the access to the web-app.
<.> Allow all email domains unless you use a social auth provider, you'll want to manage this in your IdP and NOT in your application.
<.> Set the redirect URL to an `http` URL, this defaults to `https`.
<.> Open up the `.env` file and set this variable to a random 32-byte base64 string `openssl rand -base64 32 | tr -- '+/' '-_'`.
<.> Expose port `4180`.
====

Start everything up by running:

[source,bash]
----
docker compose up
----

> Now open your browser to `\http://localhost:4180/echo`, and you will be redirected to a page with a "sign-in" button. Click the button,  and you will be redirected back to the "echo" application, and you should see information about the newly authenticated request!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now open your browser to `\http://localhost:4180/echo`, and you will be redirected to a page with a sign-in button. Click the button, and you will be redirected back to the "echo" application, and you should see information about the newly authenticated request!
```
removed quotes, removed extra space

====
[source,diff]
----
       OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET}
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_SKIP_PROVIDER_BUTTON: true # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_NAME: SESSION # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SAMESITE: lax # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_SESSION_STORE_TYPE: redis # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_REDIS_CONNECTION_URL: redis://redis
    ports:
      - 4180:4180
+    depends_on:
+      - redis
+
+  redis:# <.>
+    image: redis:7.0.2-alpine3.16
+    volumes:
+      - cache:/data # <.>
+
+volumes:
+  cache:
+    driver: local
----

<.> Skip the default login page and redirect directly to the IdP.
<.> By default, the cookie name is `_oauth2_proxy`; change it to `SESSION`.
<.> Set the cookie's same site policy to `lax`; the redirect from the OAuth IdP will need the session cookie.
<.> Use Redis to store session information.
<.> Start up a Redis container.
<.> Persist the Redis data between restarts.
====

Stop the docker-compose process (kbd:[Ctrl + C]) and start it up again:

[source,bash]
----
docker compose up
----

Once again, open your browser to `\http://localhost:4180/` and open up your network tab, you will see the renamed and now smaller `SESSION` cookie.

> You _could_ stop here, but you shouldn't; we still have a few issues: API clients are not supported, and we haven't talked about logging out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You _could_ stop here, but you shouldn't. We still have a few issues: API clients are not supported, and we haven't talked about logging out.
```

IMPORTANT: For the next section, you will need an access token. You can use the access token from your last request's `x-access-token` header. Open your terminal and set an environment variable: `export TOKEN=\{your-token-value}`.

> == REST API Clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== REST API clients
```
sorry!

For the sake of this post, I will consider any client that sets an `Authorization` HTTP header to be an API client. For example: `Authorization: Bearer \{access_token_here}`.

The API client probably cannot handle a redirect response but expects a `40x` status code to be returned.

image::{% asset_path 'blog/add-auth-to-any-app-with-oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy-simple.svg' %}[alt=Sequence Diagram showing an API request through oauth2-proxy,align=center,link={% asset_path 'blog/add-auth-to-any-app-with-oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy-simple.svg' %}]

> Let's take a step back and configure OAuth2 Proxy to allow JWT access tokens. This might be all you need for some applications, but if you need to support both browser and API clients, keep reading, we will get there in the following section.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's take a step back and configure OAuth2 Proxy as an https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/the-resource-server/[OAuth resource server], which accepts JWT access tokens. This might be all you need for some applications, but if you need to support both browser and API clients, keep reading, we will get there in the following section.

TIP: It is common, but it's **not** required for https://oauth.net/2/access-tokens/[OAuth 2.0 access tokens] to be a JWT. If you are using a different OAuth IdP, double-check if they support JWTs before continuing.
```

        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto http;

        proxy_http_version 1.1; # <.>
        proxy_pass http://web-app:8080/; # <.>
    }
}
----

<.> Don't expose this route to external clients.
<.> Nginx makes a request to `oauth2-proxy` REST API, to verify the auth for this request.
<.> Add headers returned from the auth request.
<.> HTTP 1.0 is the default if not set.
<.> Send authenticated requests to the web app.
====

Restart the docker containers and verify everything is working with HTTPie (make sure you are using port `80` now).

[source,bash]
----
http localhost/echo "Authorization: Bearer ${TOKEN}"
----

If you remove or change the `Authorization` header, a `401` will be returned. Browser requests will now also return a `401`!

Almost done! We still need to make everything work for both API clients and browsers, and handle sign-out requests.

== Route  all traffic through Nginx

Sending all the traffic through Nginx has the added benefit of giving you control of how the OAuth2 Proxy endpoints are exposed. For example, the previous section marked the `/oauth2/auth` route as "internal," so only the `auth_requst` directive can use it.

> In the `nginx-default.conf.template`, add a couple of new `location` sections to expose the other `/oauth2` endpoints. The first `location` will handle the OAuth 2.0-related requests like the redirect callback. The second will configure the sign-out endpoint to accept only POST requests. (This prevents a rogue GET request from ending the user's session).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `nginx-default.conf.template`, add a couple of new `location` sections to expose the other `/oauth2` endpoints. The first `location` will handle the OAuth 2.0-related requests like the redirect callback. The second will configure the sign-out endpoint to accept only POST requests. (This prevents a rogue GET request from ending the user's session.)
```
punctuation tweak. if the sentence btwn the parens is complete, the period goes on the inside.

        proxy_set_header X-Scheme                $scheme;
    }

    location = /oauth2/sign_out { # <.>
        # Sign-out mutates the session, only allow POST requests
        if ($request_method != POST) {
            return 405;
        }

        proxy_pass       http://oauth2-proxy:4180;
        proxy_set_header Host                    $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP               $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Scheme                $scheme;
    }
...
----

<.> Send the OAuth callback and logout requests to oauth2-proxy.
<.> Only allow POST requests to the sign-out endpoint.
====

NOTE: The sign-out endpoint does not use a CSRF token. TODO: link to Alisa's post on this topic.

One last change, update the `location /` section to redirect to the sign-in page for all non-API clients:

[source,conf]
----
location / {
        auth_request /oauth2/auth;

        # if the authorization header was set (i.e. `Authorization: Bearer {token}`)
        # assume API client and do NOT redirect to login page
        if ($http_authorization = "") {
            error_page 401 = /oauth2/start;
        }
...
----

== Configure OAuth2 Proxy to support API and browser clients

> If you have been following along closely, you'll have noticed that there are a few OAuth2 Proxy configuration values that are overloaded; for example, the "client ID" is used both as the ID of the OAuth client, and the JWT value for the audience. Luckily, there is a workaround! Here is the final annotated `docker-compose.yml`:

Author: ```suggestion
Sometimes, an application needs to handle requests from browsers and other API clients.  In this case, the application acts both as an OAuth client and resource server. OAuth2 Proxy can be configured to support both types of applications. However, you may have noticed that a few OAuth2 Proxy configuration values are overloaded; for example, the "client ID" is used both as the ID of the OAuth client, and the JWT value for the audience. Luckily, there is a workaround! Here is the final annotated `docker-compose.yml`:
```

      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${CLIENT_SECRET}

      OAUTH2_PROXY_SKIP_JWT_BEARER_TOKENS: true # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_OIDC_EXTRA_AUDIENCES: api://default # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_OIDC_EMAIL_CLAIM: sub # <.>

      OAUTH2_PROXY_SET_XAUTHREQUEST: true # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_ACCESS_TOKEN: true # <.>

      OAUTH2_PROXY_SESSION_STORE_TYPE: redis # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_REDIS_CONNECTION_URL: redis://redis

      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_REFRESH: 30m # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_NAME: SESSION # <.>
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET} # <.>

  nginx:
    image: nginx:1.21.6-alpine
    depends_on:
      - oauth2-proxy
      - web-app
    volumes:
      - ./nginx-default.conf.template:/etc/nginx/templates/default.conf.template
    ports:
      - 80:80

  redis:
    image: redis:7.0.2-alpine3.16
    volumes:
      - cache:/data

volumes:
  cache:
    driver: local
----

<.> Allow all email addresses; the IdP will manage which users have access.
<.> For single IdP use cases, skip the intermediate login page.
<.> oauth2-proxy defaults to `https`, this example uses `http` on localhost.

> <.> The issuer, client id, and secret will be loaded from the `.env` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<.> The issuer, client ID, and secret will be loaded from the `.env` file.
```
internal consistency

<.> Allow processing of JWT bearer tokens for API clients.
<.> Configure an extra "allowed" audience, in addition to the "client ID".
<.> Use the `sub` claim from JWT access tokens as the email address.
<.> Add user information headers to the proxied web-app request.
<.> Optional, pass the access token to the proxied web-app request.
<.> Use Redis for session management.
<.> Refresh cookies every 30 minutes.
<.> Set the session cookie name to `SESSION`.
<.> Configure the encryption key (loaded from the `.env` file).
====

Restart the services and access the application through your browser: `http://localhost/echo`. Try again using HTTPie:

[source,bash]
----
http localhost/echo "Authorization: Bearer ${TOKEN}"
----

> Both requests should show similar information!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both requests should show similar information.
```
exclamation reduction! ;-)

Without any code changes, the "echo" web application is now secured with OIDC / OAuth 2.0!

== Is OAuth2 Proxy right for your application?

This post taught you how to secure an existing application with OAuth 2.0 without any code changes! OAuth2 Proxy isn't just for legacy applications; it's also commonly used in a sidecar pattern with Kubernetes, allowing you to keep authorization concerns separate from your application.

It's not perfect, though; there are a few shortcomings:

- SSO logout (link:/blog/2020/03/27/spring-oidc-logout-options[OIDC RP-Initated Logout]) isn't supported yet.
- Requires working around a logout route that accepts `GET` requests and doesn't require a CSRF token.

> - API use cases only support JWTs access tokens; if your application needs to link:/blog/2020/08/07/spring-boot-remote-vs-local-tokens[remotly validate tokens] you would need another solution. It may be easier to configure https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_jwt_module.html[Nginx's JWT module] instead.

Author: ```suggestion
- API use cases support JWT-only access tokens; if your application needs to link:/blog/2020/08/07/spring-boot-remote-vs-local-tokens[remotely validate tokens] you would need another solution. It may be easier to configure https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_jwt_module.html[Nginx's JWT module] instead.
```

These first two problems can be fixed with a few updates to the OAuth2 Proxy configuration. Edit the `docker-compose.yml` file:

====
[source,diff]
----
       OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET}
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_SKIP_PROVIDER_BUTTON: true # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_NAME: SESSION # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SAMESITE: lax # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_SESSION_STORE_TYPE: redis # <.>
+      OAUTH2_PROXY_REDIS_CONNECTION_URL: redis://redis
    ports:
      - 4180:4180
+    depends_on:
+      - redis
+
+  redis:# <.>
+    image: redis:7.0.2-alpine3.16
+    volumes:
+      - cache:/data # <.>
+
+volumes:
+  cache:
+    driver: local
----

<.> Skip the default login page and redirect directly to the IdP.
<.> By default, the cookie name is `_oauth2_proxy`; change it to `SESSION`.
<.> Set the cookie's same site policy to `lax`; the redirect from the OAuth IdP will need the session cookie.
<.> Use Redis to store session information.
<.> Start up a Redis container.
<.> Persist the Redis data between restarts.
====

Stop the docker-compose process (kbd:[Ctrl + C]) and start it up again:

[source,bash]
----
docker compose up
----

> Once again, open your browser to `\http://localhost:4180/` and open up your network tab, you will see the renamed and now smaller `SESSION` cookie.

Author: ```suggestion
Once again, open your browser to `\http://localhost:4180/echo` and open up your network tab, you will see the renamed and now smaller `SESSION` cookie.
```

  nginx:
    image: nginx:1.21.6-alpine
    depends_on:
      - oauth2-proxy
      - web-app
    volumes:
      - ./nginx-default.conf.template:/etc/nginx/templates/default.conf.template
    ports:
      - 80:80

  redis:
    image: redis:7.0.2-alpine3.16
    volumes:
      - cache:/data

volumes:
  cache:
    driver: local
----

<.> Allow all email addresses; the IdP will manage which users have access.
<.> For single IdP use cases, skip the intermediate login page.
<.> oauth2-proxy defaults to `https`, this example uses `http` on localhost.
<.> The issuer, client ID, and secret will be loaded from the `.env` file.
<.> Allow processing of JWT bearer tokens for API clients.
<.> Configure an extra "allowed" audience, in addition to the "client ID".
<.> Use the `sub` claim from JWT access tokens as the email address.
<.> Add user information headers to the proxied web-app request.
<.> Optional, pass the access token to the proxied web-app request.
<.> Use Redis for session management.
<.> Refresh cookies every 30 minutes.
<.> Set the session cookie name to `SESSION`.
<.> Configure the encryption key (loaded from the `.env` file).
====

> Restart the services and access the application through your browser: `http://localhost/echo`. Try again using HTTPie:

Author: ```suggestion
Restart the services and access the application through your browser: `\http://localhost/echo`. Try again using HTTPie:
```
